workflow/report/haphic.rst, before:

This contact map shows the scaffolding effort done by the HapHiC tool. The
scaffolding is based on the Hi-C data and the assembly (thus reference-free). In
the contact map, the axes represent the groups of scaffolds that were scaffolded
together. The colour intensity represents the number of Hi-C contacts between
the groups of scaffolds. These contacts are used to determine the physical
distance between sequences in the assembly.

Please use manual curation with e.g. Juicebox to improve the scaffolding. Run
the following command to create the necessary files for Juicebox:

.. code-block:: bash

    singularity exec workflow/singularity/haphic/haphic.f8f7451.sif results/{{ snakemake.wildcards.asmname }}/2.scaffolding/01.haphic/{{ snakemake.wildcards.asmname }}_HapHiC/04.build/juicebox.sh

Ideally, a diagonal should be seen from the left bottom to the top right, with
the centromeres, telomeres and other repeats as off-diagonal signals. In case
other off-diagonal signals are present, these indicate mis-joins during the
scaffolding process (or misassemblies in the assembly).

Commit message:

remove code for juicebox as it doesn't run

workflow/report/haphic.rst, after:

This contact map shows the scaffolding effort done by the HapHiC tool. The
scaffolding is based on the Hi-C data and the assembly (thus reference-free). In
the contact map, the axes represent the groups of scaffolds that were scaffolded
together. The colour intensity represents the number of Hi-C contacts between
the groups of scaffolds. These contacts are used to determine the physical
distance between sequences in the assembly.

Please use manual curation with e.g. Juicebox to improve the scaffolding. The
following bash script contains example commands to create the input:
`results/{{ snakemake.wildcards.asmname }}/2.scaffolding/01.haphic/{{ snakemake.wildcards.asmname }}_HapHiC/04.build/juicebox.sh`

Ideally, a diagonal should be seen from the left bottom to the top right, with
the centromeres, telomeres and other repeats as off-diagonal signals. In case
other off-diagonal signals are present, these indicate mis-joins during the
scaffolding process (or misassemblies in the assembly).
